---
title: Why Minecraft Should Be Your Model Online Community
date: 2013-01-10 07:00
author: David Timmons
category: marketing
slug: why-minecraft-should-be-your-model-online-community
draft: false
metaDescription: >-
  Minecraft is one example of a successful online community. You would do well to study it!
hero:
  imgAlt: "Minecraft Floating Island"
  imgUrlSrc: "{{ imagePath }}2013/01/why-minecraft-should-be-your-model-online-community0.jpg"
  creditText: "Image: \"Minecraft Floating Island\" by"
  creditUrlText: "Drotth"
  creditUrlSrc: "http://www.minecraftforum.net/forums/show-your-creation/fan-art/1576932-minecraft-wallpaper-in-hd"
  creditUrlTitle: "View the original image on Minecraft Forum."
  caption: >-
    "<i>Minecraft</i> is an indie video game turned major enterprise based on the
    passion of its community. This is one example of an online community to
    which you should pay attention."
---

*[Minecraft][]* is a video game well-known to indie gamers. Developed
and published independent of major corporations, this is a virtual
sandbox game about "breaking and placing blocks". And with revenues
of more than $80 million generated by a small team, *Minecraft* is
worth a closer look.

A strong community is what every business wants for itself. Brand
advocates create buzz which leads to sales. *Minecraft* is significant
because it grew to be so successful based solely on word of mouth among
the gaming community.

*Minecraft*, owned by the company Mojang, successfully filled an unmet
need in the market. Gamers rallied around the developer. Eventually, a
strong brand community formed that propelled *Minecraft* to significant
success. While many independent developers create games out of passion
rather than a desire to chase dollars, outspoken and loyal gamers can
generate buzz leading to considerable reward for those involved.

[Lego Ideas][] is an example of a large, passionate community. The
*Lego Ideas* premise is community members create their own vision of
the sets they think Lego should manufacture. Given enough support
from others in the community, Lego will take these community ideas and
produce new sets. Lego will even consider sets
[based on a brand like *Minecraft*][3]. How many brands do you know
that have their own Lego set?

The *Minecraft* community supports Mojang because Mojang operates in
full conversation with the very same people who helped make it
successful. Community is more than Facebook. It's more than Twitter.
These are just tools that help enable it. The roots of a real community
are embedded in an organization's DNA, not added on top of "the way
we've always done things."

Organizations like Mojang who recognize this and devote themselves to
their fanbase are rewarded with loyal brand advocates. The *Minecraft*
community helped this game grow from a small idea into an enterprise. We
see [a convention][4], [t-shirts][5], [a Lego set][6], and [a soundtrack][7]
available because the community wanted it.

Getting to this point is not easy, but it is possible. Mojang made
*Minecraft* into the product its community wanted. And it maintains an
intimate relationship with its gamers by encouraging reciprocity. Mojang
may have developed *Minecraft*, but at this point, the fans own the
brand just as much as the company.

What do you think of *Minecraft*? Have you seen another passionate
community build up around a brand?


[3]: https://ideas.lego.com/projects/4038 "Click here to visit the Minecraft Lego Ideas page."

[4]: http://mineconparis.tumblr.com/ "Click here to visit the MineCon Tumblr blog."

[5]: https://www.threadless.com/cartoon-tv-characters/minecraft "Click here to visit the Minecraft Threadless store."

[6]: http://shop.lego.com/en-US/Minecraft-21102 "Click here to visit the Minecraft Lego Shop page."

[7]: http://c418.bandcamp.com/album/minecraft-volume-alpha "Click here to visit the Minecraft soundtrack page."

[Lego Ideas]: https://ideas.lego.com/ "Click here to visit the official Lego Ideas community."

[Minecraft]: https://minecraft.net/ "Click here to visit the official Minecraft website."
