---
title: How To Use Google Analytics To Predict Sales Success
date: 2013-02-21 07:00
author: David Timmons
category: marketing
slug: how-to-use-google-analytics-to-predict-sales-success
draft: false
metaDescription: >-
  Google Analytics is a crystal ball that can predict your sales success. Take a few minutes
  to learn how.
hero:
  imgAlt: "Google Analytics Sales Prediction Overview"
  imgUrlSrc: "{{ imagePath }}2013/02/how-to-use-google-analytics-to-predict-sales-success0.jpg"
  creditText: "Image: Screenshots taken of Google Analytics by"
  creditUrlText: "Google, Inc."
  creditUrlSrc: "http://www.google.com/analytics/"
  creditUrlTitle: "Click here to visit the Google Analytics website."
  caption: >-
    "Google Analytics is a complex tool. However, using it to read your
    visitors' level of interest in your brand is easy if you know how to
    look."
---

[Google Analytics][] is a "crystal ball" in the right hands. It can
predict customer intentions based on their interactions with your
website. And since interested visitors are more likely to convert into
sales leads, it's worth learning how to spot these signals. Best of all,
interpreting customer signals with Google Analytics is easy if you know
how to use the tool.

**1.) Pageviews.**
![Google Analytics Overview: "Pageviews" (1 of 3)][3]

Navigate to your *Audience Overview* screen. This is typically the
default screen for Google Analytics. Once you're there, compare
pageviews with unique visitors during your desired timeframe. Are there
any dates when pageviews spike considerably higher than the number of
unique visitors to your website? Focus on that date. It could be exactly
the signal we want.

**2.) Engagement.**
![Google Analytics Overview: "Engagement" (2 of 3)][4]

With your timeframe narrowed to the dates you identified, navigate to
*Behavior Â» Engagement*, and select *Page Depth*. What do you see? Do
you have 20 visitors who looked at 1 page and 2 visitors who looked at
30 pages? Our 2 visitors may represent the kind of traffic we want. Now,
look at *Visit Duration* on this same screen. If your special guests
stayed on your site for more than a couple minutes, things are looking
very good.

**3.) Advanced Segmentation.**
![Google Analytics Overview: "Advanced Segmentation" (3 of 3)][5]

We want to isolate for further analysis the 2 unique visitors in our
example who each accrued 30 pageviews. Click on the *Advanced Segments*
button and create a new segment where pageviews are greater than a
particular number. In this example, we'll create a segment where
pageviews are greater than 25. Apply your *Custom Segment*. We've now
isolated our special guests. You can also create additional parameters
for your *Custom Segments* that will refine your Google Analytics data
however you desire.

**4.) Visitors Flow.**

Now, navigate to the *Visitors Flow* screen. Look at the page
interactions. Note that Google Analytics counts a pageview every time a
visitor loads one of your website pages. If a particular visitor
meandered through your site then hit the browser's back button to return
from where they came, the associated pageviews number will be
artificially inflated. *Visitors Flow* is one way to check for this (and
another way is to create additional filters in your *Custom Segments*.)
Assuming these special visitors in our example are legitimate, look at
how they navigate through your website. If they hit all your key pages
and read more about your product, these are very strong signals that
your segmented visitors are interested business prospects.

**5.) Additional Analysis.**

Once you get to this point, Google Analytics will have given you a
strong idea how many unique visitors viewed your key pages and spent
significant time on your website. From there, you can look at Google
Analytics sections such as *Traffic Sources* to see from where and
(possibly) why your interested visitors came to your website. This can
be important for measuring the effectiveness of your marketing activity.

**6.) Benchmark.**

In our example 10% of our unique visitors showed strong interest in the
brand. You can follow these same steps and plot this value over time to
see your baseline potential sales leads. Your job as a marketer is make
that number go up! Ideally, the higher the interested visitors
percentage, the more sales you'll produce.

**7.) Conclusion.**

This Google Analytics example is very simple. However, the concepts will
apply in a variety of situations. Having the Google Analytics crystal
ball at your side is a good way to predict your sales through measuring
your marketing success.

What web analytics methods or tools do you use with *your* website?


[3]: {{ imagePath }}2013/02/how-to-use-google-analytics-to-predict-sales-success1.jpg "Google Analytics Overview: 'Pageviews' (1 of 3)"

[4]: {{ imagePath }}2013/02/how-to-use-google-analytics-to-predict-sales-success2.jpg "Google Analytics Overview: 'Engagement' (2 of 3)"

[5]: {{ imagePath }}2013/02/how-to-use-google-analytics-to-predict-sales-success3.jpg "Google Analytics Overview: 'Advanced Segmentation' (3 of 3)"

[Google Analytics]: http://www.google.com/analytics/ "Click here to visit the Google Analytics website."
