---
title: "Fox And The \"Firefly\" Hat: A Case Study in Brand Management"
date: 2013-04-15 08:00
author: David Timmons
category: marketing
slug: fox-and-the-firefly-hat-a-case-study-in-brand-management
draft: false
metaDescription: >-
  A healthy fan-brand relationship benefits everyone. Fox and Firefly fans demonstrate what
  happens when that relationship becomes uneven.
hero:
  imgAlt: "Cunning read"
  imgUrlSrc: "{{ imagePath }}2013/04/fox-and-the-firefly-hat-a-case-study-in-brand-management0.jpg"
  creditText: "Photo: \"Cunning read\" by"
  creditUrlText: "Ewen Roberts"
  creditUrlSrc: "http://www.flickr.com/photos/donabelandewen/3755969693/"
  creditUrlTitle: "View the original photo on Flickr."
  caption: >-
    "A healthy fan-brand relationship benefits everyone. Fox and 'Firefly'
    fans demonstrate what happens when that relationship becomes uneven."
---

Fans grow brands. The most dedicated fans build unofficial communities,
reveling in the joy that participation with a favorite brand provides.
Fans drive sales and love sharing their passion with friends.

Brands give fans something to value. They invest time and money to bring
new ideas to market. Creating a brand requires an extensive business
commitment, yet successful fan-favorite brands can thrive for years,
earning millions.

This harmonious, delicately-balanced relationship quickly becomes
noxious when one side demands more than the other side provides. In the
worst cases, ill will leads to lost revenue, which harms everyone.

## Fox and the 'Firefly' hat

*[Firefly][]* remains a popular brand despite losing its place on the
Fox Network in late 2002. This "space western" amassed a dedicated
fanbase that adores *Firefly* more than 10 years after Fox cancelled
the show. To them, *Firefly* is very special.

During one of the final *Firefly* episodes, a particular character
(Jayne Cobb) dons an orange, knitted hat. The show's producers intended
this hat as a visual gag, however, fans have made it their own.

Knitted "Jayne hats" regularly find their way into Etsy stores and
convention booths as a badge of honor both sold and shared among
*Firefly* devotees. This is one source from which many fans feed their
passion.

*Firefly* fans had a need. When the official brand neglected to fill
that void, these same fans provided a solution.

## Money talks

In 2012 Fox licensed the right to sell official *Firefly* apparel. This
includes the Jayne hat, which has been a staple among the fan community
for many years.

Any brand in this position faces a dilemma: Is the benefit gained
through defending your intellectual property worth more than the benefit
gained from good will among your fans?

U.S. law allows legal defense of your brand when fans sell their own
unofficial solutions. After all, allowing unofficial merchandise sales
may "dilute" your brand trademarks. You will anger some of your fans,
but you will also redirect any earned revenue back to yourself.

Conversely, allowing fans to have their way generates good will. If your
brand management approach permits some leeway concerning fan activity,
any new goods you offer can financially benefit from the resulting good
will. You may never be able to sell an official version of what your
fans offer, but your other ideas could be just as profitable.

So which is worth more to a business: revenue gained through legal
defense or good will among the fan community?

A brand's answer defines its attitude toward its fans more clearly than
any mission statement or press release could ever do.

## Brand management is tricky business

Fox recently chose to send cease and desist letters to *Firefly* fans
selling Jayne hats.

Fans feel justified selling these hats, claiming they built the demand
at a time when Fox showed no interest in the *Firefly* brand. Fox
determined unofficial Jayne hat sales would hurt revenue and took
measures to maximize money earned on a brand they invested resources to
develop.

**Who is right?**

This fan-brand relationship has become unbalanced, and predictably, ill
will has already led to lost revenue. [One merchant][3] even decided to
donate all profit it earns on official Jayne hats in order to appease
*Firefly* fans.

Brand management is tricky business.

## Everyone can win

Today's fan-brand relationship is more participatory than ever before in
history. [*Minecraft* fans and Mojang][4] are just one example of a
fan-brand relationship characterized by balanced participation; the
results have benefited everyone.

Ultimately the best, most profitable outcome occurs when fans and the
brands they adore both work together, respecting one another,
appreciating the other.

And *that* mirrors *any* healthy relationship.

Fox is within its legal rights to defend *Firefly* from possible
infringement. But when the cost outweighs the benefit, why not let the
fans have their say? [Read more about the situation here][5].

What do you think?


[3]: http://www.thinkgeek.com/blog/2013/04/nice-hat-jayne.html "Click here to read more about Think Geek's response."

[4]: {{ buildPath }}why-minecraft-should-be-your-model-online-community/ "Click here to read more about 'Minecraft' and Mojang."

[5]: http://www.buzzfeed.com/ellievhall/firefly-hat-triggers-corporate-crackdown "Click here to read more about the Jayne hat."

[Firefly]: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0303461/ "Click here to read more about 'Firefly'."
